Hello everybody and welcome to this quick lecture on what are normals, Now normals are an incredibly
useful part of Blender and generally we don't need to touch them but some things can happen that make
them go wrong.
But first of all before we get into it we're going to have a quick discussion about what a normal actually
is.
So if you grab a piece of paper in front of you and draw a straight line across using a ruler of course
the normal to that straight line is straight up at 90 degrees to it.
Now in the 3D world the simplest face we can have is a triangle.
And when we draw that triangle it creates a flat surface.
And if we were to take 90 degrees from that flat surface that is the normal of the surface.
Now normals are used all over the place.
We haven't started even discussing them yet and that's why they're coming up now.
If we just have each face having its own normal you get a very faceted look to your model.
You can see where all the individual faces are.
However we can do things like turn on smooth shading, If we go and turn on smooth shading what you will
find is something that looked like a disco ball originally starts to look more spherical more smooth
as the name implies now smooth shading is just one of the things that normals are used for, We use them
later on in texturing to make sure that a flat surface actually looks like it's textured that's faking
normals and we'll get to that later in the course.
Now the one thing about normals that a lot of people don't realize because blender doesn't show it that
well anymore is if you've got an inward facing normal just like the hairs on your body they're great
if they grow outwards and not inwards an inwards facing normal is going to cause you issues especially
if you exports your model to a game engine it will end up looking invisible and they will show you the
ways in a few moments that you can actually get round that and make sure you don't get any of those
problems.
But even I've been caught out occasionally where you inadvertently scale something negatively and if
you do that you will flip the normals of a face and if you were to export it or for a 3D printing it
would fail for a game engine it would turn invisible.
Now you can get around some of that but it's actually very computationally heavy.
You've probably seen this yourself when playing a game if you've ever clipped the level put your head
through the wall or even fallen through the floor in some games where the physics collisions just don't
work.
You don't see the rest of the world it goes invisible you can see through everything.
And that is exactly why we need to be conscious of what normals are and how we can correct them.
So let's dive deeper into this now in the next lecture will have a look at normals within blender how
we can manipulate them and also how we can watch out for those pitfalls that I've been discussing and
I'll see you all in that next lecture.